Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Carson. Gregory Benford has emerged as one of the
leading science fiction writers in recent years with such efforts as In the
Ocean of Night and the multi-award winning timescape. And Benford's writing is
characterized not only by the meticulous detail paid to scientific aspects, but
also by its elegant literary style. We ask him why he focuses on style. I tend
to believe that you should play all your suits if you're going to be an earnest
writer. You should deal with both style and content and background and
characterization and everything. I certainly include a large dollop of science
in my work, I think. And I try to blend this together with the kind of people
who do science. That's my real interest is the impact of science on people and
the other way around. Being a professor of physics at the University of
California, Irvine, Benford is not a full-time writer. In order to produce works
of science fiction, he is forced to write when he can. I spend most of my time
doing research and a lot of time teaching a course. And then I have maybe 10, 15
percent of my time left over for writing. It's not really left over because it's
my weekends and evenings. How do I do it? Sometimes I wonder. The best answer is
hurriedly. But in fact, I do work on my prose a great deal. I do many drafts of
everything. I recently acquired a word processor to make this process simpler.
But fundamentally, long ago, I decided to practice time conservation wherever
possible. The first rule of that is never do anything twice unless you enjoy it.
So I try to never, say, have to redraft simple things like memos and always very
selective about what I do with my time. But he views this dual role as an aid to
his writing, not a hindrance. I draw a lot of my material that I write about
from life, from observing people and so on. So I'm really doing two things at
once. When I go to a scientific conference, I'm sopping up the material. But I'm
also sopping up scientists, watching the way people actually act. Every novelist
does that. It's just that most novelists are full-time writers. And therefore,
they don't get out and see the real world very much. I think that's the great
liability of being a professional writer who only does that, is that you run out
of material. And I think the 20th century is full of writers whose big problem
is that they ran out of material. Even with his crowded schedule, Bedford
manages to squeeze in a little reading. I read, when I can, the best science
fiction and the best in the mainstream. And also, for example, hard-boiled
detective stories and a lot of other things. I keep up on the prominent short
story writers in America, for example. So I try to read eclectically. He
acknowledges that his reading does influence his style to some extent, although
he allows that his style changes from book to book. I don't really think that
I've got a style. I certainly have some identifiable mannerisms. But it seems to
me that every one of my books is written somewhat differently. And I do change
style and approach fairly often. I may be wrong about that. Many people may
think that there is a noticeable Bedford style. But I don't think that I pick up
those things from my reading directly, although certainly I'm influenced by a
lot of writers. Every writer is influenced by people who came before. Otherwise,
we'd have to invent literature whole each time we sat down to do a novel. More
on Gregory Benford tomorrow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Carson. In today's program, we continue our
discussion with science fiction author Gregory Benford. Benford has an
interesting concept of how science fiction differs from mainstream literature. I
think that mainstream and any genre like SF are, in a sense, two ends of a
spectrum, and one blends into the other. There are obviously the books that only
science fiction addicts will read, and which are incomprehensible to ordinary
readers, and that defines a boundary. But obviously it's a gradual transition
from one to the other. Science is, in science fiction, not the really crucial
dividing point. There are many things in science fiction which set it apart,
which are not connected with knowing a great deal of science, but rather with
knowing a lot of accepted bits of jargon or commonplaces we've assumed about the
future, the way galactic empires are put together and so forth, usually very
simple-mindedly, in my estimation. And an ordinary reader coming to these things
simply cannot understand them, and therefore he rather usually quickly gives up.
But therefore I think that it's the mannerisms of SF that tend to set it apart
as much as anything else. Of course, science fiction is concerned with content a
great deal more than other literature, and therefore that scares off people,
too. The novel Timescape took Benford a decade to conceive and to execute.
Timescape has received accolades from those who do not ordinarily read science
fiction. We asked Benford why such people are surprised when they read a science
fiction work that is also good literature. Yes, I've gotten a fair number of
letters and phone calls and so on from people who, quote, don't usually read
science fiction, unquote, and are surprised to find that science fiction can
actually have all the virtues of a regular novel and still be science fiction.
Well, it's good that these people are catching on to that fact. And admittedly,
the field has not given them a large number of examples to learn from, but I
hope we will in future. Of course, the reason we haven't produced such books
before is because it's damned hard. It's a lot of work. And science fiction is
typically not a field which rewards taking a decade to write a book. That's a
sad fact, but it's true. Benford rewrote his first novel, Deeper Than the
Darkness, and retitled it The Stars and Shroud. This was apparently motivated by
his deep desire to produce well-written science fiction. I didn't want the old
works to appear with my name on them when I could see that they were so deeply
flawed. And I thought I could do a better job. I don't think I'm going to do
that with any more of my books, but I certainly greatly revised a novel of mine,
sort of homage to the Heinlein Juvenile, called Jupiter
Project. I revised that when it went into paperback. And I did that, as you
said, with The Stars and Shroud. Basically, I don't like to have less than my
best in front of the public. And I care more about craftsmanship than I do about
storing up my energies for the next project. I would prefer to salvage an old
work than hammer away at a new one, if I could be contented that at least I had
never done anything I thought was really dreadful and allowed it to go out in
public. A lot of writers don't feel this way. And I understand, particularly
economically, why they would believe so. In our next show, we will discuss some
details of Benford's novel, Timescape.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Carson. Gregory Benford's novel, Timescape, was
published in 1980 to great acclaim. The hardback edition has already become a
collector's item. The novel has garnered many awards, including the Nebula and
the John W. Campbell International Award. Benford was motivated to write it
because he wanted to portray it realistically, a scientist at work. I took ten
years to write Timescape. It's written out of my experience as a graduate
student at the University of California in the 1960s. Two-thirds of the book
occurs in 1962 and 63. And I had always noticed that science fiction very seldom
dealt with the life of a scientist as it is really lived, as I saw it. Benford
wove into the matrix of a scientist at work a unique twist on time travel
stories, the Time Telegram. When I began to think about writing a book about
time, a subject that had already and always fascinated me, and which science
fiction had, it seemed to me, done to death, I began, in fact, to think about
the way scientists would really try to attempt to transmit information across
time. Not time travel, but simple time telegrams, if you will. And how would it
happen? What would make people do it? How would it be received? What would
scientists think about it? Because, you see, the basic ingredient in the novel
is to treat time communication like a new paradigm in science so that you have
scientists confronting something that's very unusual, that they can't explain,
that seems to not fit the standard way of doing science. After all, here's an
experiment that's being interfered with and seems to be carrying a message. How
bizarre. And so, this is like a scientist encountering a brand new scientific
idea. So you get to see in a dramatic fashion how scientists deal with ambiguity
and the unusual nature of their work, which does crop up now and then. After
all, that's what scientific revolutions are about. About two-thirds of Timescape
takes place in 1963 and the remainder in 1998. Benford chose those particular
dates for a reason. I really wanted to talk about both the 60s and 1998, where
the message is sent from, but mostly, from the point of view of us right here
and right now, 1981, I deliberately made the dates of the book fit so that the
book was published in hardback in 1980, exactly halfway between the two times
that are the subject of the book. There are a number of real-life people in
Timescape. We asked Benford if he had to seek their permission to write them in
the book. Well, the people who actually have walk-on speaking parts who are
identified as real people, I got the permission from. Freeman Dyson,
particularly. People who are mentioned in passing, I didn't ask their permission
because, after all, they are people in the world and you can refer to them. No
one has a copyright on his name. Benford himself is a character in Timescape.
There are some twins from Oklahoma who are not named in there who are, in fact,
myself and my twin brother. We asked Benford if, while he was writing Timescape,
he feared its style might prevent its becoming a commercial success. Definitely.
But I decided, well, what the hell, I was going to write the book the way I
wanted to, and I didn't care how it would do. In fact, when I finished the
manuscript, I was pretty convinced that I would be able to sell it for only a
minimal advance, and that would be just about it. I personally thought it was by
far the best piece of writing I'd ever done, but that doesn't mean I thought it
was going to be commercial. In fact, I didn't.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.